Jellyfish Facts: (As of 11/11/2023)

Sources: https://www.montereybayaquarium.org/animals/animals-a-to-z/jellies?gclid=CjwKCAiA6byqBhAWEiwAnGCA4IPlxw4o3J9X3A-D4msmsEMHDF2z-DdQIZY5xrXtyn7b6XkGlYsLiRoC7d4QAvD_BwE


https://www.mbari.org/news/
https://www.mbari.org/animal/bloody-belly-comb-jelly/
https://www.mbari.org/news/how-comb-jellies-adapted-to-life-in-the-deep-sea/
https://www.mbari.org/news/ctenophores-the-story-of-evolution-in-the-oceans/



Brainless beauties
Jellies are one of mother nature’s strangest wonders. They have no bones, brains, teeth, blood or fins — but don’t let their simple anatomy fool you. These animals are spectacularly diverse and beautiful. Find these enchanting animals gently pulsating throughout the world's ocean, from its surface to its darkest depths.
 
All about the jelly
"Jellies" are any animals that have a gelatinous body and live in the water column. They are called gelatinous zooplankton, or just "gelata" for short. Their bodies are made up of more than 95 percent water. Graceful and sometimes dangerous, jellies range in size from miniscule to enormous. One of the largest, the lion’s mane jelly, has a giant-sized bell eight feet (2.4 m) across. Its flowing tentacles can reach 100 feet (30.5 m) or more — longer than two school buses parked end-to-end! Despite their unique and varied physiology, jellies thrive throughout the world's ocean.
Jelly anatomy
Jellies are composed of three layers: the epidermis, which is the outer layer; the mesoglea, a middle layer made up of a thick, elastic, jelly-like substance; and the inner layer known as the endoderm gastrodermis. Often, their bodies have radial symmetry, which means that a jelly’s body parts branch out from its center much like the spokes of a wheel. In other instances, like with Ctenophores, the animals have biradial symmetry — when it’s divided along an axis, the two halves of its body are mirror images of each other.
Senses
Though brainless, jellies have simple tools that allow them to sense the world around them. Jellies detect light, gravity and hormones using rhopalia — small sensory structures — located on the edge of their bells.
Bodies — muscle and rhythm
Jellies are not the strongest animals in the ocean, but if you've ever been mesmerized by a group of them pulsing to their own rhythms, you've seen them flex their muscles. The transparent muscle fibers are arranged in rays that stretch from the center of the bell to the margin. With a synchronized squeeze of these muscles — coordinated by the eight rhopalia along the edge of the bell — the jelly throws its body into a wave that moves smoothly outward from the bell, pushing it forward. The motion also stirs up the water and pushes it past the jelly's tentacles.
Diet
The typical jelly eats small, swimming organisms called plankton: a mixture of tiny creatures like amphipods, copepods and krill. It also eats larval shrimps, crabs, fish and even other jellies.
How jellies eat
Some jellies use stinging cells — called nematocysts — to catch, sting and inactivate prey. When sensitive stinging cells brush up against an object, they burst — and out pops a tiny, sharp barb. The barb pierces the prey and injects it with venom. Once the prey has been captured in the oral arms, digestion begins. The jelly's oral arms guide the prey to its stomachs in the center under its bell.
Inside the bell there are open chambers, like stomachs, that further digest the prey. The digested remains of the prey are then passed around the body through a series of interconnected canals. Most jellies that sting have mild toxins that don't bother humans. But some can be as painful as bee stings, and a few species, like box jellies, can be extremely dangerous.
Other feeding strategies
Sticky cells
Other jellies, like comb jellies, use sticky cells — called colloblasts — to catch their prey. They then retract their tentacles into the mouth and digestion begins soon after using a variety of cilia to quickly break down their prey.
Mucus nets
Some jellies secrete large sheets, or nets, of mucus to help them capture the smallest plankton — prey too small for most other animals to catch. Secreted by a special organ called an endostyle, a jelly’s mucus net can be located either inside or outside its body. Mucous nets range in size from an inch (2.5 cm) to over 6 feet (1.8 m).
Predators
Some fish turn the tables, eating the jelly for dinner: blue rockfish, molas, dogfish, anchovies, chum salmon and mackerel have all been recorded eating jellies. The jelly is also a favorite food of sea turtles.
Jelly “friends”
There are some fish that spend time swimming amid the tentacles of a jelly. This strange choice of hangout may help them avoid being eaten by bigger fish. They also get the chance to pick at scraps the jelly has caught, or nibble parasites off the jelly.
 


Bell jelly
The bell jelly is not a true jelly but rather a hydromedusa. Usually smaller than true jellies and not nearly as colorful, a bell jelly has a translucent bell and a clapper-shaped mouth stalk. Bell jellies also have 100 or more wispy tentacles and red ocelli, or eyespots, which are sensitive to light. Bell jellies are probably vertical migrators. They remain in dark, deep waters during the day and come to the surface at night.
Animal type
Invertebrates
Habitat
Coastal wetlands
Size
Bell to about 2.5 inches (6.4 cm) in diameter
Diet
Zooplankton
Range
Nearshore waters of bays and harbors along the Pacific Coast
Relatives
Hydroids, siphonophores, hydrocorals; Phylum: Cnidaria; Class: Hydrozoa
Did you know?
A bell jelly spends about half its time near the seafloor, where it feeds on small benthic (bottom-dwelling) creatures. Bell jellies often "hop" up from the seafloor; this movement may stir up sediments, uncovering potential food. They also swim to the surface and sink back down to the seafloor, a process that lets them collect plankton as they drift.
Bell jelly populations are dwindling, possibly due to dredging, pollution and collection for neurobiological research.
Conservation
Bell jellies used to be abundant in bays and estuaries along the West Coast. But their nearshore seafloor homes have been disturbed by dredging, urbanization and pollution runoff. Jelly populations, especially hydromedusae, are declining in heavily impacted coastal areas. To understand the causes of population increases and decreases, we must know more about the life cycles of these animals.
Cool facts
Bell jellies respond to bright lights at night (such as camera flashes) and quickly swim away.
Since their red coloration disappears in deep water where light is low, bell jellies are virtually invisible to deep sea predators.




Black sea nettle

Donate now
Black sea nettle (Chrysaora achlyos)
The black sea nettle is considered a giant jelly; its distinctive purplish bell can reach over three feet (.9 m) in diameter. Its lacy, pinkish mouth-arms can reach nearly 20 feet (6 m) in length and its stinging tentacles can reach 25 feet (7.6 m) or more. They typically appear in large blooms in San Diego Bay — most recently in 2012.

Natural history
The black sea nettle is an elusive creature; during most years its whereabouts are unknown. Scientists named this jelly in 1997, although pictures of the species were taken as early as 1926. Many details about its behavior, distribution and lifecycle remain a mystery.

Cool facts
The black sea nettle was the largest invertebrate discovered in the 20th century!
The black sea nettle provides the Pacific butterfish with food and protection. The silvery butterfish feeds on the plankton the jelly gathers. When danger approaches, the butterfish hides inside the jelly’s bell.

Bloodybelly comb jelly (Lampocteis cruentiventer)
This species always has a blood-red stomach and a sparkly appearance.
Blubber jelly (Catostylus)
Also known as the blue jelly, its colors range from very light blue to dark purple and burgundy and has a bell that pulses in a hypnotic rhythm. Most commonly found near Australia.
Box jelly (Tripedalia cystophora)
Comb jelly (Ctenophora)
Beautiful, oval-shaped animals with eight rows of tiny comblike plates that they beat to glide through the water, creating a shimmering rainbow effect.
Cross jelly (Mitrocoma cellularia)
This bioluminescent species has a bell rimmed with hundreds of fine white tentacles and has a distinct "X" pattern formed from the white canals that are visible beneath it.
Crown jelly (Cephea cephea)
With spike-covered bells, these jellies are unlike any others at the Aquarium — and we’re the first institution to successfully raise this mysterious species from polyps to adulthood.
Crystal jelly (Aequorea victoria)
Nearly transparent with long, delicate tentacles, this species gives off a green-blue glow under special lighting.
Egg yolk jelly (Phacellophora camtschatica)
Thanks to the yolk-yellow center of their translucent bells, this massive species looks like a bird’s egg was cracked and poured into the water, especially during their motionless drifting.
Elegant jelly (Tima)
Little is known about this species, but one thing is certain: their bells glow bright green when exposed to blue light thanks to their fluorescent molecules which are stimulated by certain wavelengths.
Lion’s mane jelly (Cyanea)
Even if this giant jelly has a highly toxic sting, reports of human fatalities are few and its tentacles can extend to over 100 feet long.
Mediterranean jelly (Cotylorhiza tuberculata)
This species is commonly known as the "fried egg" jelly because they have smooth, elevated bells.
Midwater jelly (Halicreas minimum)
Compared to most jellies, the Colobonema is a strong swimmer; it's equipped with 32 tentacles that can drop off, confusing any would-be predators.
Moon jelly (Aurelia)
This species has a translucent, moonlike circular bell, short tentacles, and four oral arms where it broods larvae.
Purple-striped jelly (Chrysaora colorata)
Careful: these large silvery-white, purple-striped jellies are known to have a painful sting.
Pacific Sea nettle (Chrysaora fuscescens)
This species has long tentacles and frilly mouth-arms, all covered with stinging cells that paralyze small prey to be easily maneuvered towards the mouth area to be digested.
Spotted jelly (Mastigias papua)
Also known as a "lagoon jelly", this species has a rounded bell and four clumps of oral arms with clublike appendages and a yellow-brown color due to the symbiotic algae grown in its tissues.
Upside-down jelly (Cassiopea)
Because of the symbiotic algae living inside its tissues, this mouthless jelly is brownish colored and lies upside down with its bell on the seafloor so all of it will photosynthesize.



Jellies and humans
The most dangerous jelly
The sea wasp (Chironex fleckeri), or box jelly, is widely regarded as one of the most dangerous jellies in the world. Its potent toxins can cause great pain, scar or even kill people unlucky enough to swim into its tentacles. But as long as you're not getting stung, a box jelly is a remarkable creature to behold. The body is square rather than umbrella-shaped, and each corner of the "box" has a set of eyes. The box jelly lives in the waters off Northern Australia. Slightly less dangerous species live in other tropical waters, including near Hawaii, where they often gather in shallow waters eight to 10 days after a full moon.
Hungry? Pass the jellies
Some jellies are popular as food in Asia. Worldwide, an estimated 321,000 metric tons of jellies are caught for food every year. Japan alone imports up to 10,000 tons of jellies annually, where they can sell for $10 to $12 per pound. Preparing jellies is a competitive business complete with trade secrets practiced by respected "jellyfish masters."
Some jellies sold for human consumption have been known to contain excessive levels of aluminum due to lack of regulation on how jellies are dried and preserved. Consumers have been advised to limit their consumption of products made from jellies.
Jellywatch.org is a database created by our sister organization, the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI), to monitor jellyfish populations. Report your own jellyfish sightings to help scientists learn more about jelly blooms!
 
Blooms
Groups of jellies are known as “blooms.” Some view the jelly as a problematic animal — or worse, an underwater pest — due to large jelly blooms. These attitudes have led to the intentional destruction or removal of jelly populations. It is important to keep in mind that jellies have been blooming on this planet for over 600 million years and that jelly blooms are not new phenomena.
Recent jelly "blooms" are also being studied for their potential as sentinels of ocean change.
Most jelly populations are seasonal, but recently some jellies have appeared in areas they've never been seen before. For example, massive blooms of Mediterranean jellies appeared in the Mar Menor coastal lagoon after a regional agricultural boom. The agricultural development caused excessive nutrients to seep into the ground and eventually run into the lagoon through coastal runoff. Scientists are investigating causes for jellyfish blooms like these by studying their life cycles.
 
The life cycle of jellies
Jellies can reproduce both sexually and asexually. During the adult (and most recognizable) medusa phase of their life cycle, jellies reproduce by broadcasting egg and sperm that develop into free-swimming planula larvae. These larvae float around until conditions are just right and then attach themselves to a substrate. Once attached, they develop into polyps and start to grow and feed.
When the time and water conditions are just right, some of these polyps will metamorphose and release ephyrae — infant jellies. These baby jellies grow into the mature medusa phase. Thus, the cycle begins again.
Conservation: Why jellies are important
Jellies play a vital role in ocean ecosystems. Not only do they eat plankton, but some are food for large animals like sea turtles. In Monterey Bay, for example, the enormous Pacific leatherback sea turtle travels across the Pacific Ocean, all the way from Indonesia, to feed specifically on sea nettles.
A recent study led by the Aquarium showed that jellies are also threatened by microplastics, and that they serve as an entry point for microplastics in the open ocean food chain. This shows how important jellies are as a food source for many animals.
Jelly research
Our jellies research helps us understand the life cycles and growing conditions of jellies.
In addition to developing animal care methods for jellies that are now used by aquariums and scientists worldwide, our aquarists have described the life cycles of five species of jellies displayed in the Aquarium: the cross jelly (Mitrocoma cellularia), the egg-yolk jelly (Phacellophora camtschatica), the flower hat jelly (Olindias formosus), the Pacific sea nettle (Chrysaora fuscescens) and the purple-striped jelly (Chrysaora colorata).
Our jelly aquarists also have described the full life cycles of two new species of deep-sea jellies — Earleria corachloeae and Earleria purpurea — and are studying several more.

Frequently asked questions (FAQ)
Do we call them “jelly” or “jellyfish”? What’s the difference?
A more accurate term for these marine animals is just “jellies” because, technically speaking, they’re not fish. The term "jellies" refers to a large number of organisms including tunicates, salps, cnidarians and ctenophores.
Why do jellies sting?
Jellies’ nematocysts only sting when triggered by touching an object. The activator of the nematocyst can detect different cell types, triggering only on certain prey and by physical disturbance — such as a human hand.
How venomous are jellies?
Most jellies have mild toxins that don't affect humans, although some can hurt as much as a bee sting. However, the stings of species like the sea wasp, box and Irukandji jellies can be extremely dangerous to humans.
What should I do if I’m stung by a jelly?
There haven't been enough medical studies on treating jelly stings to say for certain if one treatment works better than another. That said, topical pain blocking medications such as lidocaine are effective at relieving pain and burning. In a joint study with Stanford Medical, we found that most common treatments are ineffective at treating pain. Only lidocaine was an effective pain reliever.
Note: If you’re in an emergency situation involving a jelly sting or are having an allergic reaction, please go to the emergency room immediately.
Which species of jelly is dangerous to humans?
Chironex fleckeri, otherwise known as the sea wasp, is the most venomous animal in the world. Its venom attacks the heart, nervous system and skin cells of whatever animal swims into its tentacles. One meter of tentacle contact for an adult human is fatal within just minutes. The venom’s effect is so painful, in fact, that humans have gone into shock and drowned or died of heart failure while swimming ashore. Luckily, most Chironex stings are mild and do not require hospitalization.
Can you survive a box jelly sting?
Those who have been lucky enough to survive an encounter with one are known to experience pain for several weeks afterwards, often developing scars on the areas of skin where the venomous nematocysts made contact.
Did you know?
Check out these fun facts about jellies:
Jellies are older than the dinosaurs. Scientists have fossilized evidence that suggests jellies have been around for 600 millions years or more, making them one of the oldest multicellular life forms on our planet.
Diet plays a role in how some jellies are colored. Look closely and you’ll notice that the contents of a jelly’s four stomachs can often be seen after feeding time at the Aquarium.
There’s a jelly species whose name was inspired by the punk rock movement. The Amphinema rollinsi was named after musician and writer Henry Rollins by the Aquarium’s own marine biologist Chad Widmer, who is a big fan of his work.
One of the most toxic jellies is also one of the tiniest. The body’s reaction to the toxic venom of the Irukandji, which is found off the coast of Australia and has bells less than one inch wide, is so overpowering that it has its own name: Irukandji syndrome. Symptoms include shooting muscle pains, nausea and fluid in the lungs.

News
Genetic probes give new clues about the stunning diversity of comb jellies
News
08.31.21
Comb jellies—known to scientists as ctenophores (pronounced “teen-oh-fours”)—mesmerize with their beauty, but these captivating creatures remain poorly studied due to their delicate nature. MBARI researchers have used the power of genetics to learn more about these animals.
In a study published online earlier this summer in Molecular Ecology Resources, MBARI researchers Lynne Christianson, Shannon Johnson, Darrin Schultz, and Steve Haddock examined a specific gene sequence in comb jellies. This sequence has revealed untold diversity within this group of animals.
Scientists have described around 200 comb jelly species so far. They come in an assortment of shapes, sizes, colors, and patterns. Some are small, while others like this giant comb jelly (Aulacoctena sp.) can be quite large—growing larger than a football. All play an integral role in ocean ecosystems. Image: © 2006 MBARI
“Using genetics, we discovered surprising diversity in some groups, including some more commonly-seen species that were previously considered a single species, but are now revealed to be multiple species,” said Lynne Christianson, lead author on the study and a senior research technician at MBARI. This research also uncovered several comb jelly species that are new to science.
This work—funded by the David and Lucile Packard Foundation, the National Science Foundation, and the National Institutes of Health—opens the door for future research on comb jellies using eDNA, or environmental DNA. eDNA holds promise for detecting marine animals from the drifting bits of genetic material they leave behind in seawater. “Importantly, the genetic data we have shared to public databases will provide a valuable reference for others using eDNA to help reveal the complexity of ocean ecosystems,” said Christianson.
Comb jellies live throughout the ocean, from the shallow depths to the deep seafloor and from warm tropical seas to chilly polar waters. Although they are an important part of marine ecosystems, the challenge of collecting intact specimens, especially from the deep sea, makes them difficult to study. “Most scientists are not able to collect comb jellies in any recognizable manner—they are just too fragile,” explained MBARI Senior Scientist Steve Haddock.
But MBARI is uniquely equipped to study these delicate drifters. 
MBARI’s research vessels offer a platform for blue-water diving—a form of scuba diving far offshore suspended in open water—and deployment of specialized robotic submersibles called remotely operated vehicles (ROVs). 
Blue-water diving is one of several techniques used by MBARI researchers to collect delicate ctenophores. Image: Steve Haddock © 2018 MBARI
Using both scuba and submersibles, MBARI researchers have been able to carefully collect comb jellies for research in the lab. For decades, they have amassed a collection of specimens representing nearly every known family of comb jellies.
Studying these animals from their appearance alone has been valuable, but has at times been an imperfect science. Some specimens are damaged, some distinguishing characteristics between species are cryptic, and some tissues are too delicate for preservation. In addition to examining the appearance of live animals, MBARI researchers have turned to genetics to identify and catalog their specimens.
The mitochondrial gene cytochrome-c-oxidase subunit I (COI) is like a genetic fingerprint for animals. This gene is widely used in everything from bees to baboons for distinguishing species and even geographic subpopulations. Building a library of ctenophore “fingerprints,” though, was no easy task. 
To read these genes, researchers use primers—short, manufactured DNA pieces that complement segments of DNA found in a species’ genome and serve as anchor points to start genetic sequencing. The DNA of comb jellies is so different from other animals that the standard primers do not work for most comb jelly species. The team set out to solve this problem. First, the team had to make primers that would work on comb jelly COI sequences. They did this by examining the genomes of comb jellies and testing hundreds of primer combinations. Then, they used those primers to generate the library of individual sequences from across hundreds of comb jelly specimens they had collected. These are the two most impactful outcomes of the work.
The team created the most complete library of DNA sequences from comb jellies, adding 72 species to the global database where only 15 had been represented before. By comparing sequences of the COI gene, they also built a more accurate family tree for comb jellies at the species level. 
MBARI researchers prepared a “tree” of relationships using COI sequences to show species differences between comb jellies. They used this tree to help other researchers determine which DNA primers would work best for a group of interest. Major branches include the lobed comb jellies (pink), beroids (blue), and the seafloor-dwelling platyctenes (green). Image: Christianson et al. 2021 Molecular Ecology Resources
This new library of genetic information helped clarify relationships between similar-looking species. The genetic probes have sparked several new questions about common species.
MBARI researchers frequently observe the scallop comb jelly (Bathocyroe sp.) off the central California coast. But a closer look at its COI gene suggested three distinct species live off our coast. Even more intriguing? None seem to align with the three known species in the genus. Slight differences in appearance and depth distribution from the recognized species of Bathocyroe suggest the three species off California’s Central Coast may be new to science. 
MBARI’s ROVs have been instrumental in revealing the untold diversity of the ocean’s midnight zone. In 34 years of research, MBARI has documented more than 200 species previously unknown to scientists. One such find was the bloody-belly comb jelly (Lampocteis cruentiventer). MBARI scientists George Matsumoto and Bruce Robison contributed to the original description of this species in 2001. Researchers sometimes see individuals with the same body shape, but lacking the signature scarlet color. One variant has an amber appearance, while another deeper-dwelling one is brilliant magenta. Looking at the COI gene has confirmed scientists’ suspicions that these are not unique color morphs but likely separate species.

Train track comb jelly (Deiopea sp.)

Rabbit-eared comb jelly (Kiyohimea usagi)

Lobed comb jelly (Bolinopsis sp.)

Scallop comb jelly (Bathocyroe sp.)

Bloody-belly comb jelly (Lampocteis cruentiventer)

Undescribed comb jelly (Lampocteis sp.)

Undescribed comb jelly (Lampocteis sp.)
There are currently 200 known, or described, comb jelly species. With the COI gene sequences hinting that some of these may be more than one genetically distinct species, that count is likely to grow three- or even fourfold. 
“Everywhere that we have been able to look in detail has revealed unseen diversity, suggesting there are even more species of ctenophores than our most optimistic estimates,” said Haddock.
Examining comb jellies collected from more locations around the globe will be a critical next step for understanding relationships among these animals by comparing the sequences of potentially undescribed species to sequences from species formally recognized by scientists. The COI gene provides a useful starting point for researchers to focus their work.
This work has laid the foundation for scientists around the globe to read the genetic fingerprints of comb jellies left behind in eDNA and improve efforts to catalog the diversity of life in the ocean. Comb jellies have largely been excluded from the promising new field of rapid species identifications because of the scarcity of COI gene sequences for this group necessary to detect the eDNA they leave behind.
The MBARI research team has now provided tools for other scientists to begin rapid identifications of comb jellies. Samples from MBARI and our collaborators have added five times as many comb jelly species to the National Center for Biotechnology Information archives as have been previously sequenced. “We are providing genetic sequences for an unprecedented number of ctenophore species into public databases for all to use,” said Christianson.
Who knows what new discoveries await now?
Article by Raúl Nava




How comb jellies adapted to life in the deep sea
News
07.03.19

This ctenophore in the geunus Bolinopsis was photographed almost 1,000 meters (3,300 feet) below the surface of Monterey Bay.
This ctenophore in the genus Bolinopsis was photographed almost 1,000 meters (3,300 feet) below the surface of Monterey Bay. Other members of this genus live near the sea surface. Image: © 2006 MBARI
Washed up on a beach, a comb jelly or ctenophore (pronounced “teen-oh-four”) might look like a little transparent grape. But ctenophores are extremely diverse, living from the equator to the poles and from the ocean surface to more than 7,000 meters, or more than four miles, down. MBARI researchers and their collaborators are developing computer models that compare the genetic material of many species of ctenophores to learn how their body chemistry has evolved to life in different environments.
Jacob Winnikoff, a University of California, Santa Cruz, graduate student in Steve Haddock’s lab, recently published a paper about this research in the journal Integrative and Comparative Biology. Winnikoff’s coauthors on this paper were Haddock and collaborators Warren Francis at the University of Southern Denmark and Erik Thuesen at The Evergreen State College. The study was part of the DEEPC (Diversity, Ecology, and EcoPhysiology of Ctenophores) project–a National Science Foundation-supported collaboration to study ctenophore evolution.
Winnikoff and his coauthors studied 34 different species of ctenophores living at different water temperatures and depths. Their samples came mostly from MBARI cruises in Monterey Bay (cool, shallow water and cold, deep water), and Hawaii (warm, shallow water). A few were collected by friends traveling to Greenland and Norway (cold, shallow water).
Some of the ctenophores used in this study were collected during blue-water SCUBA dives near Hawaii. Image: Steve Haddock © 2018 MBARI
To compare these animals, Winnikoff and his coauthors looked at four key enzymes in the ctenophores’ bodies. As Winnikoff explained, “Enzymes are like tiny molecular machines that convert one chemical into another. Many essential biological processes, like turning food into energy, involve ‘assembly lines’ made up of a series of different enzymes. One of our main goals is to figure out how certain key enzymes might behave under different temperatures and pressures.”
“If you think of enzymes as little machines,” Winnikoff continued, “then you could say we were focused on the individual parts that make up these machines, which are called amino acids. More specifically, we were trying to figure out which amino acids are critical for life in the low temperatures and high pressures of the deep sea.”
However, it is extremely difficult to study enzymes inside of a living animal. For this reason, Winnikoff and his colleagues studied the ctenophores’ enzymes by looking at their transcriptomes. “A transcriptome is the collection of blueprints that an organism uses to construct its molecular machines,” Winnikoff explained.
Just as a blueprint might show all the parts in a particular machine, so the transcriptome includes genetic material that the organism uses to arrange each amino acid in an enzyme. However, unlike a blueprint, the transcriptome does not tell scientists exactly how these parts fit together, nor what each part does.
This ctenophore, Eurhamphea vexilligera, lives in relatively warm, shallow water off the Hawaiian Islands. Image: Shannon Johnson © 2018 MBARI
Figuring out the function of each part (amino acid) is a huge challenge. Historically, trained scientists have manually looked through lists of sequences of amino acids and searched for patterns—for example, similarities between animals that live at similar depths.
As part of this research, Winnikoff developed computer software that attempts to do this automatically—finding patterns in the transcriptomes of ctenophores living at different water temperatures and depths. “This software helps us make educated guesses as to which of an enzyme’s parts might be critical to making it work in each animal’s normal habitat,” Winnikoff explained.
“We were trying to answer questions like, ‘Do distantly related ctenophores living in the same environment have the same genetic adaptations, and if so, what are they?’”
In fact, Winnikoff’s software did a reasonable job at “predicting” which amino acids were likely to be related to differences in temperature and pressure. “Just getting plausible results is a big milestone,” Winnikoff said, “even though the software remains a work in progress.”
Winnikoff’s model suggested that between five and 15 percent of the amino acids in each enzyme were critical for adaptation to different temperatures and pressures. It also suggested where within each enzyme these amino acids were most likely to be found.
But the model’s predictions of critical amino acids are not the same as direct evidence. “This model really looks at correlations between each animal’s transcriptome and its habitat,” Winnikoff pointed out. “It doesn’t prove that these amino acids are actually the ones conveying special properties.
Graduate Research Assistant Jacob Winnikoff has been experimenting with laboratory techniques for getting bacteria to produce ctenophore enzymes. Image: Kim Fulton-Bennett © 2018 MBARI
“Eventually, with predictions that are reliable and consistent, we’ll be able to do lab tests to find out if these predictions are true,” he said. “First we’ll need to create enzymes in which the critical amino acids are modified or missing. For example, we could modify the amino acid sequence from a shallow species by adding particular “deep” amino acids. Then we would use bacteria or yeast to produce large amounts of these experimental enzymes. Finally, in the lab, we can test how well the experimental enzymes perform at different pressures and temperatures.
“If our lab results show that the model predictions are correct, this would be really exciting,” Winnikoff said. “We have lots of amazing data from next-generation DNA sequencing, but there isn’t a lot of software to analyze and compare these data across diverse species. If we can reliably predict critical amino acids, we could use our model to make predictions about how other living things—not just ctenophores—adapt to their environment. In theory, we could even bio-engineer custom enzymes to work under extreme temperatures and pressures—something that would be very useful in an industrial setting.”
Ctenophores: the story of evolution in the oceans
News
04.09.18

Ctenophores (pronounced “TEEN-o-fours”) are mysterious ocean drifters found anywhere from the ocean’s edge to the deepest parts of the ocean. Colorful, translucent, and delicate, these predators slip through ocean waters capturing other animals, typically using their long, sticky tentacles.
Marine biologist Steven Haddock of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI) and his fellow researchers have embarked on an ambitious project to collect, compare, and understand the evolutionary history of these remarkable animals. The project’s name, DEEPC, is an acronym for Diversity, Ecology, and EcoPhysiology of Ctenophores. Supported by a grant from the Dimensions of Biodiversity Program of the National Science Foundation, the DEEPC team is currently hard at work.
The researchers are especially interested in ctenophores’ ability to survive a wide range of ocean conditions. One major thrust of the DEEPC team’s investigations is to search for the genetic changes that made it possible for groups of shallow-water ctenophores to evolve and adapt to the crushing pressure of the deep sea, and for deep ctenophores to adapt to surface conditions.
Evolving enzymes
When it comes to understanding genetic change and evolution, ctenophores are both useful and challenging animals to study. They are found in many parts of the ocean, but are difficult to capture alive. Most importantly for the DEEPC team, ctenophores as a group have a long and complicated evolutionary history.
Over many generations, some groups of ctenophores evolved from shallow-living animals into deep-sea creatures, but other groups may have gone the other way—from the deep ocean to the shallows.
This gives scientists a unique opportunity. With ctenophores from distantly related groups evolving similar responses to their environment (a process called “convergent evolution”), researchers can tease out the specific genetic changes that allow each group to succeed.
This bright orange ctenophore in the genus Aulacoctena lives thousands of meters below the sea surface, and captures food using two long, sticky tentacles. Image: © 2002 MBARI
For example, every organism must be able to metabolize, or process food into energy. This involves the use of a set of classic enzymes, Haddock says, that are found in slightly modified forms in many different creatures. Both deep-sea and shallow-water ctenophores have those enzymes, but they function differently under the immense pressure at 2,000 meters than they do near the surface.
That means that in many different species of deep-sea ctenophores, these enzymes are likely evolving similar features that allow them to work deep below the surface. Researchers looking for those similarities will be able to compare enzymes in different ctenophores to determine how that evolutionary process might have occurred, and what evolutionary changes are necessary for an animal to live in the deep sea.
Interpreting the ctenophore code
Joining Haddock as principal investigators in the DEEPC project are Erik Thuesen at Evergreen State College and Joseph Ryan from the Whitney Laboratory for Marine Bioscience. At MBARI, the DEEPC team also includes Jacob Winnikoff and Darrin Schultz, graduate students in Haddock’s lab.
These researchers have a wide variety of backgrounds, experience, and resources, which all come into play in analyzing the evolutionary history of ctenophores. For example, some members of the group will study the genetic material of ctenophores while others will examine the physical products of their genes, such as proteins and enzymes.
Because ctenophores are difficult to find and capture, each collected animal is precious to the researchers. Most of the time, says Haddock, they collect an animal, freeze it, and sample its tissue to preserve its genetic material for later extraction and analysis.
Graduate student Jacob Winnikoff cultures genetically modified bacteria that will be used to produce ctenophore enzymes. Image: Kim Fulton-Bennett © 2018 MBARI
But if the researchers want to experiment with proteins and enzymes, they need to collect multiple animals to get enough tissue to work with. “We may just see one of these things,” Haddock says, “so we can’t just take it and grind it up.” To address this issue, Jacob Winnikoff is extracting ctenophore DNA and inserting it into bacteria, which then produce a larger supply of the enzymes of interest. The researchers can then run experiments on those bacterially produced enzymes, inspecting how they work under high pressures, without destroying rare specimens.
With genetic codes and a supply of enzymes to work with, the researchers hope to pinpoint exactly which changes in DNA are necessary to create enzymes that can function at high pressure. Eventually, they may even be able to make changes to the bacterially produced DNA to test how various species of ctenophores might have evolved during their long journeys to or from the deep.
DEEPC at MBARI
The DEEPC project intersects with many of Haddock’s other research interests. For one thing, the work the DEEPC team is doing will contribute to a worldwide ctenophore survey Haddock has been working on, which will eventually describe all of the known species of ctenophores and their relationships to one another.
This research might also contribute to an ongoing debate about the position of ctenophores in the tree of life. Among biologists there is active disagreement as to whether sponges or ctenophores were the earliest group to branch off from other members of the animal kingdom. Although Haddock doesn’t intend to publish a paper to directly address this controversy, it’s likely that some of his team’s work will shed further light on the history of animal evolution.
Another reason Haddock studies ctenophores is to learn more about their bioluminescence, or the way they produce and emit light. Although over 90 percent of ctenophores in Monterey Bay make their own light, the mechanisms and evolutionary benefits of this bioluminescence are not well understood. Haddock has long been fascinated by the glowing inhabitants of the oceans, and is considered a world expert in the field.
This ctenophore in the genus Beroe is a voracious predator, often attacking and swallowing other jellies whole. Image: George Matsumoto © 1995 MBARI
As the DEEPC project progresses, the team hopes to answer long-standing questions about evolution in the oceans and the ability of ctenophores to live under a wide variety of conditions. From Haddock’s perspective, the project will also shed some much-needed light on a group of animals long relegated to obscurity.
“Most people don’t have a really good intuitive sense of ctenophores,” Haddock commented. “Even in textbooks, people draw them upside down, because their conception of them is that they must be like a jellyfish; they flip them over and put their mouths facing down because they assume they must be swimming along like that.”
With all the work being conducted by the DEEPC team, we’ll soon know much more about these delicate, drifting, glowing predators. And we’ll know much more about their remarkable adaptation to their wide range of habitats, and perhaps the evolutionary processes that helped them survive.


