Jellyfish Facts: (As of 11/11/2023)

Sources: https://www.montereybayaquarium.org/animals/animals-a-to-z/jellies?gclid=CjwKCAiA6byqBhAWEiwAnGCA4IPlxw4o3J9X3A-D4msmsEMHDF2z-DdQIZY5xrXtyn7b6XkGlYsLiRoC7d4QAvD_BwE


https://www.mbari.org/news/
https://www.mbari.org/animal/bloody-belly-comb-jelly/
https://www.mbari.org/news/how-comb-jellies-adapted-to-life-in-the-deep-sea/
https://www.mbari.org/news/ctenophores-the-story-of-evolution-in-the-oceans/

https://ocean.si.edu/ocean-life/invertebrates/jellyfish-and-comb-jellies#section_16508



Brainless beauties
Jellies are one of mother nature’s strangest wonders. They have no bones, brains, teeth, blood or fins — but don’t let their simple anatomy fool you. These animals are spectacularly diverse and beautiful. Find these enchanting animals gently pulsating throughout the world's ocean, from its surface to its darkest depths.
 
All about the jelly
"Jellies" are any animals that have a gelatinous body and live in the water column. They are called gelatinous zooplankton, or just "gelata" for short. Their bodies are made up of more than 95 percent water. Graceful and sometimes dangerous, jellies range in size from miniscule to enormous. One of the largest, the lion’s mane jelly, has a giant-sized bell eight feet (2.4 m) across. Its flowing tentacles can reach 100 feet (30.5 m) or more — longer than two school buses parked end-to-end! Despite their unique and varied physiology, jellies thrive throughout the world's ocean.
Jelly anatomy
Jellies are composed of three layers: the epidermis, which is the outer layer; the mesoglea, a middle layer made up of a thick, elastic, jelly-like substance; and the inner layer known as the endoderm gastrodermis. Often, their bodies have radial symmetry, which means that a jelly’s body parts branch out from its center much like the spokes of a wheel. In other instances, like with Ctenophores, the animals have biradial symmetry — when it’s divided along an axis, the two halves of its body are mirror images of each other.
Senses
Though brainless, jellies have simple tools that allow them to sense the world around them. Jellies detect light, gravity and hormones using rhopalia — small sensory structures — located on the edge of their bells.
Bodies — muscle and rhythm
Jellies are not the strongest animals in the ocean, but if you've ever been mesmerized by a group of them pulsing to their own rhythms, you've seen them flex their muscles. The transparent muscle fibers are arranged in rays that stretch from the center of the bell to the margin. With a synchronized squeeze of these muscles — coordinated by the eight rhopalia along the edge of the bell — the jelly throws its body into a wave that moves smoothly outward from the bell, pushing it forward. The motion also stirs up the water and pushes it past the jelly's tentacles.
Diet
The typical jelly eats small, swimming organisms called plankton: a mixture of tiny creatures like amphipods, copepods and krill. It also eats larval shrimps, crabs, fish and even other jellies.
How jellies eat
Some jellies use stinging cells — called nematocysts — to catch, sting and inactivate prey. When sensitive stinging cells brush up against an object, they burst — and out pops a tiny, sharp barb. The barb pierces the prey and injects it with venom. Once the prey has been captured in the oral arms, digestion begins. The jelly's oral arms guide the prey to its stomachs in the center under its bell.
Inside the bell there are open chambers, like stomachs, that further digest the prey. The digested remains of the prey are then passed around the body through a series of interconnected canals. Most jellies that sting have mild toxins that don't bother humans. But some can be as painful as bee stings, and a few species, like box jellies, can be extremely dangerous.
Other feeding strategies
Sticky cells
Other jellies, like comb jellies, use sticky cells — called colloblasts — to catch their prey. They then retract their tentacles into the mouth and digestion begins soon after using a variety of cilia to quickly break down their prey.
Mucus nets
Some jellies secrete large sheets, or nets, of mucus to help them capture the smallest plankton — prey too small for most other animals to catch. Secreted by a special organ called an endostyle, a jelly’s mucus net can be located either inside or outside its body. Mucous nets range in size from an inch (2.5 cm) to over 6 feet (1.8 m).
Predators
Some fish turn the tables, eating the jelly for dinner: blue rockfish, molas, dogfish, anchovies, chum salmon and mackerel have all been recorded eating jellies. The jelly is also a favorite food of sea turtles.
Jelly “friends”
There are some fish that spend time swimming amid the tentacles of a jelly. This strange choice of hangout may help them avoid being eaten by bigger fish. They also get the chance to pick at scraps the jelly has caught, or nibble parasites off the jelly.
 


Bell jelly
The bell jelly is not a true jelly but rather a hydromedusa. Usually smaller than true jellies and not nearly as colorful, a bell jelly has a translucent bell and a clapper-shaped mouth stalk. Bell jellies also have 100 or more wispy tentacles and red ocelli, or eyespots, which are sensitive to light. Bell jellies are probably vertical migrators. They remain in dark, deep waters during the day and come to the surface at night.
Animal type
Invertebrates
Habitat
Coastal wetlands
Size
Bell to about 2.5 inches (6.4 cm) in diameter
Diet
Zooplankton
Range
Nearshore waters of bays and harbors along the Pacific Coast
Relatives
Hydroids, siphonophores, hydrocorals; Phylum: Cnidaria; Class: Hydrozoa
Did you know?
A bell jelly spends about half its time near the seafloor, where it feeds on small benthic (bottom-dwelling) creatures. Bell jellies often "hop" up from the seafloor; this movement may stir up sediments, uncovering potential food. They also swim to the surface and sink back down to the seafloor, a process that lets them collect plankton as they drift.
Bell jelly populations are dwindling, possibly due to dredging, pollution and collection for neurobiological research.
Conservation
Bell jellies used to be abundant in bays and estuaries along the West Coast. But their nearshore seafloor homes have been disturbed by dredging, urbanization and pollution runoff. Jelly populations, especially hydromedusae, are declining in heavily impacted coastal areas. To understand the causes of population increases and decreases, we must know more about the life cycles of these animals.
Cool facts
Bell jellies respond to bright lights at night (such as camera flashes) and quickly swim away.
Since their red coloration disappears in deep water where light is low, bell jellies are virtually invisible to deep sea predators.




Black sea nettle

Donate now
Black sea nettle (Chrysaora achlyos)
The black sea nettle is considered a giant jelly; its distinctive purplish bell can reach over three feet (.9 m) in diameter. Its lacy, pinkish mouth-arms can reach nearly 20 feet (6 m) in length and its stinging tentacles can reach 25 feet (7.6 m) or more. They typically appear in large blooms in San Diego Bay — most recently in 2012.

Natural history
The black sea nettle is an elusive creature; during most years its whereabouts are unknown. Scientists named this jelly in 1997, although pictures of the species were taken as early as 1926. Many details about its behavior, distribution and lifecycle remain a mystery.

Cool facts
The black sea nettle was the largest invertebrate discovered in the 20th century!
The black sea nettle provides the Pacific butterfish with food and protection. The silvery butterfish feeds on the plankton the jelly gathers. When danger approaches, the butterfish hides inside the jelly’s bell.

Bloodybelly comb jelly (Lampocteis cruentiventer)
This species always has a blood-red stomach and a sparkly appearance.
Blubber jelly (Catostylus)
Also known as the blue jelly, its colors range from very light blue to dark purple and burgundy and has a bell that pulses in a hypnotic rhythm. Most commonly found near Australia.
Box jelly (Tripedalia cystophora)
Comb jelly (Ctenophora)
Beautiful, oval-shaped animals with eight rows of tiny comblike plates that they beat to glide through the water, creating a shimmering rainbow effect.
Cross jelly (Mitrocoma cellularia)
This bioluminescent species has a bell rimmed with hundreds of fine white tentacles and has a distinct "X" pattern formed from the white canals that are visible beneath it.
Crown jelly (Cephea cephea)
With spike-covered bells, these jellies are unlike any others at the Aquarium — and we’re the first institution to successfully raise this mysterious species from polyps to adulthood.
Crystal jelly (Aequorea victoria)
Nearly transparent with long, delicate tentacles, this species gives off a green-blue glow under special lighting.
Egg yolk jelly (Phacellophora camtschatica)
Thanks to the yolk-yellow center of their translucent bells, this massive species looks like a bird’s egg was cracked and poured into the water, especially during their motionless drifting.
Elegant jelly (Tima)
Little is known about this species, but one thing is certain: their bells glow bright green when exposed to blue light thanks to their fluorescent molecules which are stimulated by certain wavelengths.
Lion’s mane jelly (Cyanea)
Even if this giant jelly has a highly toxic sting, reports of human fatalities are few and its tentacles can extend to over 100 feet long.
Mediterranean jelly (Cotylorhiza tuberculata)
This species is commonly known as the "fried egg" jelly because they have smooth, elevated bells.
Midwater jelly (Halicreas minimum)
Compared to most jellies, the Colobonema is a strong swimmer; it's equipped with 32 tentacles that can drop off, confusing any would-be predators.
Moon jelly (Aurelia)
This species has a translucent, moonlike circular bell, short tentacles, and four oral arms where it broods larvae.
Purple-striped jelly (Chrysaora colorata)
Careful: these large silvery-white, purple-striped jellies are known to have a painful sting.
Pacific Sea nettle (Chrysaora fuscescens)
This species has long tentacles and frilly mouth-arms, all covered with stinging cells that paralyze small prey to be easily maneuvered towards the mouth area to be digested.
Spotted jelly (Mastigias papua)
Also known as a "lagoon jelly", this species has a rounded bell and four clumps of oral arms with clublike appendages and a yellow-brown color due to the symbiotic algae grown in its tissues.
Upside-down jelly (Cassiopea)
Because of the symbiotic algae living inside its tissues, this mouthless jelly is brownish colored and lies upside down with its bell on the seafloor so all of it will photosynthesize.



Jellies and humans
The most dangerous jelly
The sea wasp (Chironex fleckeri), or box jelly, is widely regarded as one of the most dangerous jellies in the world. Its potent toxins can cause great pain, scar or even kill people unlucky enough to swim into its tentacles. But as long as you're not getting stung, a box jelly is a remarkable creature to behold. The body is square rather than umbrella-shaped, and each corner of the "box" has a set of eyes. The box jelly lives in the waters off Northern Australia. Slightly less dangerous species live in other tropical waters, including near Hawaii, where they often gather in shallow waters eight to 10 days after a full moon.
Hungry? Pass the jellies
Some jellies are popular as food in Asia. Worldwide, an estimated 321,000 metric tons of jellies are caught for food every year. Japan alone imports up to 10,000 tons of jellies annually, where they can sell for $10 to $12 per pound. Preparing jellies is a competitive business complete with trade secrets practiced by respected "jellyfish masters."
Some jellies sold for human consumption have been known to contain excessive levels of aluminum due to lack of regulation on how jellies are dried and preserved. Consumers have been advised to limit their consumption of products made from jellies.
Jellywatch.org is a database created by our sister organization, the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI), to monitor jellyfish populations. Report your own jellyfish sightings to help scientists learn more about jelly blooms!
 
Blooms
Groups of jellies are known as “blooms.” Some view the jelly as a problematic animal — or worse, an underwater pest — due to large jelly blooms. These attitudes have led to the intentional destruction or removal of jelly populations. It is important to keep in mind that jellies have been blooming on this planet for over 600 million years and that jelly blooms are not new phenomena.
Recent jelly "blooms" are also being studied for their potential as sentinels of ocean change.
Most jelly populations are seasonal, but recently some jellies have appeared in areas they've never been seen before. For example, massive blooms of Mediterranean jellies appeared in the Mar Menor coastal lagoon after a regional agricultural boom. The agricultural development caused excessive nutrients to seep into the ground and eventually run into the lagoon through coastal runoff. Scientists are investigating causes for jellyfish blooms like these by studying their life cycles.
 
The life cycle of jellies
Jellies can reproduce both sexually and asexually. During the adult (and most recognizable) medusa phase of their life cycle, jellies reproduce by broadcasting egg and sperm that develop into free-swimming planula larvae. These larvae float around until conditions are just right and then attach themselves to a substrate. Once attached, they develop into polyps and start to grow and feed.
When the time and water conditions are just right, some of these polyps will metamorphose and release ephyrae — infant jellies. These baby jellies grow into the mature medusa phase. Thus, the cycle begins again.
Conservation: Why jellies are important
Jellies play a vital role in ocean ecosystems. Not only do they eat plankton, but some are food for large animals like sea turtles. In Monterey Bay, for example, the enormous Pacific leatherback sea turtle travels across the Pacific Ocean, all the way from Indonesia, to feed specifically on sea nettles.
A recent study led by the Aquarium showed that jellies are also threatened by microplastics, and that they serve as an entry point for microplastics in the open ocean food chain. This shows how important jellies are as a food source for many animals.
Jelly research
Our jellies research helps us understand the life cycles and growing conditions of jellies.
In addition to developing animal care methods for jellies that are now used by aquariums and scientists worldwide, our aquarists have described the life cycles of five species of jellies displayed in the Aquarium: the cross jelly (Mitrocoma cellularia), the egg-yolk jelly (Phacellophora camtschatica), the flower hat jelly (Olindias formosus), the Pacific sea nettle (Chrysaora fuscescens) and the purple-striped jelly (Chrysaora colorata).
Our jelly aquarists also have described the full life cycles of two new species of deep-sea jellies — Earleria corachloeae and Earleria purpurea — and are studying several more.

Frequently asked questions (FAQ)
Do we call them “jelly” or “jellyfish”? What’s the difference?
A more accurate term for these marine animals is just “jellies” because, technically speaking, they’re not fish. The term "jellies" refers to a large number of organisms including tunicates, salps, cnidarians and ctenophores.
Why do jellies sting?
Jellies’ nematocysts only sting when triggered by touching an object. The activator of the nematocyst can detect different cell types, triggering only on certain prey and by physical disturbance — such as a human hand.
How venomous are jellies?
Most jellies have mild toxins that don't affect humans, although some can hurt as much as a bee sting. However, the stings of species like the sea wasp, box and Irukandji jellies can be extremely dangerous to humans.
What should I do if I’m stung by a jelly?
There haven't been enough medical studies on treating jelly stings to say for certain if one treatment works better than another. That said, topical pain blocking medications such as lidocaine are effective at relieving pain and burning. In a joint study with Stanford Medical, we found that most common treatments are ineffective at treating pain. Only lidocaine was an effective pain reliever.
Note: If you’re in an emergency situation involving a jelly sting or are having an allergic reaction, please go to the emergency room immediately.
Which species of jelly is dangerous to humans?
Chironex fleckeri, otherwise known as the sea wasp, is the most venomous animal in the world. Its venom attacks the heart, nervous system and skin cells of whatever animal swims into its tentacles. One meter of tentacle contact for an adult human is fatal within just minutes. The venom’s effect is so painful, in fact, that humans have gone into shock and drowned or died of heart failure while swimming ashore. Luckily, most Chironex stings are mild and do not require hospitalization.
Can you survive a box jelly sting?
Those who have been lucky enough to survive an encounter with one are known to experience pain for several weeks afterwards, often developing scars on the areas of skin where the venomous nematocysts made contact.
Did you know?
Check out these fun facts about jellies:
Jellies are older than the dinosaurs. Scientists have fossilized evidence that suggests jellies have been around for 600 millions years or more, making them one of the oldest multicellular life forms on our planet.
Diet plays a role in how some jellies are colored. Look closely and you’ll notice that the contents of a jelly’s four stomachs can often be seen after feeding time at the Aquarium.
There’s a jelly species whose name was inspired by the punk rock movement. The Amphinema rollinsi was named after musician and writer Henry Rollins by the Aquarium’s own marine biologist Chad Widmer, who is a big fan of his work.
One of the most toxic jellies is also one of the tiniest. The body’s reaction to the toxic venom of the Irukandji, which is found off the coast of Australia and has bells less than one inch wide, is so overpowering that it has its own name: Irukandji syndrome. Symptoms include shooting muscle pains, nausea and fluid in the lungs.

News
Genetic probes give new clues about the stunning diversity of comb jellies
News
08.31.21
Comb jellies—known to scientists as ctenophores (pronounced “teen-oh-fours”)—mesmerize with their beauty, but these captivating creatures remain poorly studied due to their delicate nature. MBARI researchers have used the power of genetics to learn more about these animals.
In a study published online earlier this summer in Molecular Ecology Resources, MBARI researchers Lynne Christianson, Shannon Johnson, Darrin Schultz, and Steve Haddock examined a specific gene sequence in comb jellies. This sequence has revealed untold diversity within this group of animals.
Scientists have described around 200 comb jelly species so far. They come in an assortment of shapes, sizes, colors, and patterns. Some are small, while others like this giant comb jelly (Aulacoctena sp.) can be quite large—growing larger than a football. All play an integral role in ocean ecosystems. Image: © 2006 MBARI
“Using genetics, we discovered surprising diversity in some groups, including some more commonly-seen species that were previously considered a single species, but are now revealed to be multiple species,” said Lynne Christianson, lead author on the study and a senior research technician at MBARI. This research also uncovered several comb jelly species that are new to science.
This work—funded by the David and Lucile Packard Foundation, the National Science Foundation, and the National Institutes of Health—opens the door for future research on comb jellies using eDNA, or environmental DNA. eDNA holds promise for detecting marine animals from the drifting bits of genetic material they leave behind in seawater. “Importantly, the genetic data we have shared to public databases will provide a valuable reference for others using eDNA to help reveal the complexity of ocean ecosystems,” said Christianson.
Comb jellies live throughout the ocean, from the shallow depths to the deep seafloor and from warm tropical seas to chilly polar waters. Although they are an important part of marine ecosystems, the challenge of collecting intact specimens, especially from the deep sea, makes them difficult to study. “Most scientists are not able to collect comb jellies in any recognizable manner—they are just too fragile,” explained MBARI Senior Scientist Steve Haddock.
But MBARI is uniquely equipped to study these delicate drifters. 
MBARI’s research vessels offer a platform for blue-water diving—a form of scuba diving far offshore suspended in open water—and deployment of specialized robotic submersibles called remotely operated vehicles (ROVs). 
Blue-water diving is one of several techniques used by MBARI researchers to collect delicate ctenophores. Image: Steve Haddock © 2018 MBARI
Using both scuba and submersibles, MBARI researchers have been able to carefully collect comb jellies for research in the lab. For decades, they have amassed a collection of specimens representing nearly every known family of comb jellies.
Studying these animals from their appearance alone has been valuable, but has at times been an imperfect science. Some specimens are damaged, some distinguishing characteristics between species are cryptic, and some tissues are too delicate for preservation. In addition to examining the appearance of live animals, MBARI researchers have turned to genetics to identify and catalog their specimens.
The mitochondrial gene cytochrome-c-oxidase subunit I (COI) is like a genetic fingerprint for animals. This gene is widely used in everything from bees to baboons for distinguishing species and even geographic subpopulations. Building a library of ctenophore “fingerprints,” though, was no easy task. 
To read these genes, researchers use primers—short, manufactured DNA pieces that complement segments of DNA found in a species’ genome and serve as anchor points to start genetic sequencing. The DNA of comb jellies is so different from other animals that the standard primers do not work for most comb jelly species. The team set out to solve this problem. First, the team had to make primers that would work on comb jelly COI sequences. They did this by examining the genomes of comb jellies and testing hundreds of primer combinations. Then, they used those primers to generate the library of individual sequences from across hundreds of comb jelly specimens they had collected. These are the two most impactful outcomes of the work.
The team created the most complete library of DNA sequences from comb jellies, adding 72 species to the global database where only 15 had been represented before. By comparing sequences of the COI gene, they also built a more accurate family tree for comb jellies at the species level. 
MBARI researchers prepared a “tree” of relationships using COI sequences to show species differences between comb jellies. They used this tree to help other researchers determine which DNA primers would work best for a group of interest. Major branches include the lobed comb jellies (pink), beroids (blue), and the seafloor-dwelling platyctenes (green). Image: Christianson et al. 2021 Molecular Ecology Resources
This new library of genetic information helped clarify relationships between similar-looking species. The genetic probes have sparked several new questions about common species.
MBARI researchers frequently observe the scallop comb jelly (Bathocyroe sp.) off the central California coast. But a closer look at its COI gene suggested three distinct species live off our coast. Even more intriguing? None seem to align with the three known species in the genus. Slight differences in appearance and depth distribution from the recognized species of Bathocyroe suggest the three species off California’s Central Coast may be new to science. 
MBARI’s ROVs have been instrumental in revealing the untold diversity of the ocean’s midnight zone. In 34 years of research, MBARI has documented more than 200 species previously unknown to scientists. One such find was the bloody-belly comb jelly (Lampocteis cruentiventer). MBARI scientists George Matsumoto and Bruce Robison contributed to the original description of this species in 2001. Researchers sometimes see individuals with the same body shape, but lacking the signature scarlet color. One variant has an amber appearance, while another deeper-dwelling one is brilliant magenta. Looking at the COI gene has confirmed scientists’ suspicions that these are not unique color morphs but likely separate species.

Train track comb jelly (Deiopea sp.)

Rabbit-eared comb jelly (Kiyohimea usagi)

Lobed comb jelly (Bolinopsis sp.)

Scallop comb jelly (Bathocyroe sp.)

Bloody-belly comb jelly (Lampocteis cruentiventer)

Undescribed comb jelly (Lampocteis sp.)

Undescribed comb jelly (Lampocteis sp.)
There are currently 200 known, or described, comb jelly species. With the COI gene sequences hinting that some of these may be more than one genetically distinct species, that count is likely to grow three- or even fourfold. 
“Everywhere that we have been able to look in detail has revealed unseen diversity, suggesting there are even more species of ctenophores than our most optimistic estimates,” said Haddock.
Examining comb jellies collected from more locations around the globe will be a critical next step for understanding relationships among these animals by comparing the sequences of potentially undescribed species to sequences from species formally recognized by scientists. The COI gene provides a useful starting point for researchers to focus their work.
This work has laid the foundation for scientists around the globe to read the genetic fingerprints of comb jellies left behind in eDNA and improve efforts to catalog the diversity of life in the ocean. Comb jellies have largely been excluded from the promising new field of rapid species identifications because of the scarcity of COI gene sequences for this group necessary to detect the eDNA they leave behind.
The MBARI research team has now provided tools for other scientists to begin rapid identifications of comb jellies. Samples from MBARI and our collaborators have added five times as many comb jelly species to the National Center for Biotechnology Information archives as have been previously sequenced. “We are providing genetic sequences for an unprecedented number of ctenophore species into public databases for all to use,” said Christianson.
Who knows what new discoveries await now?
Article by Raúl Nava




How comb jellies adapted to life in the deep sea
News
07.03.19

This ctenophore in the geunus Bolinopsis was photographed almost 1,000 meters (3,300 feet) below the surface of Monterey Bay.
This ctenophore in the genus Bolinopsis was photographed almost 1,000 meters (3,300 feet) below the surface of Monterey Bay. Other members of this genus live near the sea surface. Image: © 2006 MBARI
Washed up on a beach, a comb jelly or ctenophore (pronounced “teen-oh-four”) might look like a little transparent grape. But ctenophores are extremely diverse, living from the equator to the poles and from the ocean surface to more than 7,000 meters, or more than four miles, down. MBARI researchers and their collaborators are developing computer models that compare the genetic material of many species of ctenophores to learn how their body chemistry has evolved to life in different environments.
Jacob Winnikoff, a University of California, Santa Cruz, graduate student in Steve Haddock’s lab, recently published a paper about this research in the journal Integrative and Comparative Biology. Winnikoff’s coauthors on this paper were Haddock and collaborators Warren Francis at the University of Southern Denmark and Erik Thuesen at The Evergreen State College. The study was part of the DEEPC (Diversity, Ecology, and EcoPhysiology of Ctenophores) project–a National Science Foundation-supported collaboration to study ctenophore evolution.
Winnikoff and his coauthors studied 34 different species of ctenophores living at different water temperatures and depths. Their samples came mostly from MBARI cruises in Monterey Bay (cool, shallow water and cold, deep water), and Hawaii (warm, shallow water). A few were collected by friends traveling to Greenland and Norway (cold, shallow water).
Some of the ctenophores used in this study were collected during blue-water SCUBA dives near Hawaii. Image: Steve Haddock © 2018 MBARI
To compare these animals, Winnikoff and his coauthors looked at four key enzymes in the ctenophores’ bodies. As Winnikoff explained, “Enzymes are like tiny molecular machines that convert one chemical into another. Many essential biological processes, like turning food into energy, involve ‘assembly lines’ made up of a series of different enzymes. One of our main goals is to figure out how certain key enzymes might behave under different temperatures and pressures.”
“If you think of enzymes as little machines,” Winnikoff continued, “then you could say we were focused on the individual parts that make up these machines, which are called amino acids. More specifically, we were trying to figure out which amino acids are critical for life in the low temperatures and high pressures of the deep sea.”
However, it is extremely difficult to study enzymes inside of a living animal. For this reason, Winnikoff and his colleagues studied the ctenophores’ enzymes by looking at their transcriptomes. “A transcriptome is the collection of blueprints that an organism uses to construct its molecular machines,” Winnikoff explained.
Just as a blueprint might show all the parts in a particular machine, so the transcriptome includes genetic material that the organism uses to arrange each amino acid in an enzyme. However, unlike a blueprint, the transcriptome does not tell scientists exactly how these parts fit together, nor what each part does.
This ctenophore, Eurhamphea vexilligera, lives in relatively warm, shallow water off the Hawaiian Islands. Image: Shannon Johnson © 2018 MBARI
Figuring out the function of each part (amino acid) is a huge challenge. Historically, trained scientists have manually looked through lists of sequences of amino acids and searched for patterns—for example, similarities between animals that live at similar depths.
As part of this research, Winnikoff developed computer software that attempts to do this automatically—finding patterns in the transcriptomes of ctenophores living at different water temperatures and depths. “This software helps us make educated guesses as to which of an enzyme’s parts might be critical to making it work in each animal’s normal habitat,” Winnikoff explained.
“We were trying to answer questions like, ‘Do distantly related ctenophores living in the same environment have the same genetic adaptations, and if so, what are they?’”
In fact, Winnikoff’s software did a reasonable job at “predicting” which amino acids were likely to be related to differences in temperature and pressure. “Just getting plausible results is a big milestone,” Winnikoff said, “even though the software remains a work in progress.”
Winnikoff’s model suggested that between five and 15 percent of the amino acids in each enzyme were critical for adaptation to different temperatures and pressures. It also suggested where within each enzyme these amino acids were most likely to be found.
But the model’s predictions of critical amino acids are not the same as direct evidence. “This model really looks at correlations between each animal’s transcriptome and its habitat,” Winnikoff pointed out. “It doesn’t prove that these amino acids are actually the ones conveying special properties.
Graduate Research Assistant Jacob Winnikoff has been experimenting with laboratory techniques for getting bacteria to produce ctenophore enzymes. Image: Kim Fulton-Bennett © 2018 MBARI
“Eventually, with predictions that are reliable and consistent, we’ll be able to do lab tests to find out if these predictions are true,” he said. “First we’ll need to create enzymes in which the critical amino acids are modified or missing. For example, we could modify the amino acid sequence from a shallow species by adding particular “deep” amino acids. Then we would use bacteria or yeast to produce large amounts of these experimental enzymes. Finally, in the lab, we can test how well the experimental enzymes perform at different pressures and temperatures.
“If our lab results show that the model predictions are correct, this would be really exciting,” Winnikoff said. “We have lots of amazing data from next-generation DNA sequencing, but there isn’t a lot of software to analyze and compare these data across diverse species. If we can reliably predict critical amino acids, we could use our model to make predictions about how other living things—not just ctenophores—adapt to their environment. In theory, we could even bio-engineer custom enzymes to work under extreme temperatures and pressures—something that would be very useful in an industrial setting.”
Ctenophores: the story of evolution in the oceans
News
04.09.18

Ctenophores (pronounced “TEEN-o-fours”) are mysterious ocean drifters found anywhere from the ocean’s edge to the deepest parts of the ocean. Colorful, translucent, and delicate, these predators slip through ocean waters capturing other animals, typically using their long, sticky tentacles.
Marine biologist Steven Haddock of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI) and his fellow researchers have embarked on an ambitious project to collect, compare, and understand the evolutionary history of these remarkable animals. The project’s name, DEEPC, is an acronym for Diversity, Ecology, and EcoPhysiology of Ctenophores. Supported by a grant from the Dimensions of Biodiversity Program of the National Science Foundation, the DEEPC team is currently hard at work.
The researchers are especially interested in ctenophores’ ability to survive a wide range of ocean conditions. One major thrust of the DEEPC team’s investigations is to search for the genetic changes that made it possible for groups of shallow-water ctenophores to evolve and adapt to the crushing pressure of the deep sea, and for deep ctenophores to adapt to surface conditions.
Evolving enzymes
When it comes to understanding genetic change and evolution, ctenophores are both useful and challenging animals to study. They are found in many parts of the ocean, but are difficult to capture alive. Most importantly for the DEEPC team, ctenophores as a group have a long and complicated evolutionary history.
Over many generations, some groups of ctenophores evolved from shallow-living animals into deep-sea creatures, but other groups may have gone the other way—from the deep ocean to the shallows.
This gives scientists a unique opportunity. With ctenophores from distantly related groups evolving similar responses to their environment (a process called “convergent evolution”), researchers can tease out the specific genetic changes that allow each group to succeed.
This bright orange ctenophore in the genus Aulacoctena lives thousands of meters below the sea surface, and captures food using two long, sticky tentacles. Image: © 2002 MBARI
For example, every organism must be able to metabolize, or process food into energy. This involves the use of a set of classic enzymes, Haddock says, that are found in slightly modified forms in many different creatures. Both deep-sea and shallow-water ctenophores have those enzymes, but they function differently under the immense pressure at 2,000 meters than they do near the surface.
That means that in many different species of deep-sea ctenophores, these enzymes are likely evolving similar features that allow them to work deep below the surface. Researchers looking for those similarities will be able to compare enzymes in different ctenophores to determine how that evolutionary process might have occurred, and what evolutionary changes are necessary for an animal to live in the deep sea.
Interpreting the ctenophore code
Joining Haddock as principal investigators in the DEEPC project are Erik Thuesen at Evergreen State College and Joseph Ryan from the Whitney Laboratory for Marine Bioscience. At MBARI, the DEEPC team also includes Jacob Winnikoff and Darrin Schultz, graduate students in Haddock’s lab.
These researchers have a wide variety of backgrounds, experience, and resources, which all come into play in analyzing the evolutionary history of ctenophores. For example, some members of the group will study the genetic material of ctenophores while others will examine the physical products of their genes, such as proteins and enzymes.
Because ctenophores are difficult to find and capture, each collected animal is precious to the researchers. Most of the time, says Haddock, they collect an animal, freeze it, and sample its tissue to preserve its genetic material for later extraction and analysis.
Graduate student Jacob Winnikoff cultures genetically modified bacteria that will be used to produce ctenophore enzymes. Image: Kim Fulton-Bennett © 2018 MBARI
But if the researchers want to experiment with proteins and enzymes, they need to collect multiple animals to get enough tissue to work with. “We may just see one of these things,” Haddock says, “so we can’t just take it and grind it up.” To address this issue, Jacob Winnikoff is extracting ctenophore DNA and inserting it into bacteria, which then produce a larger supply of the enzymes of interest. The researchers can then run experiments on those bacterially produced enzymes, inspecting how they work under high pressures, without destroying rare specimens.
With genetic codes and a supply of enzymes to work with, the researchers hope to pinpoint exactly which changes in DNA are necessary to create enzymes that can function at high pressure. Eventually, they may even be able to make changes to the bacterially produced DNA to test how various species of ctenophores might have evolved during their long journeys to or from the deep.
DEEPC at MBARI
The DEEPC project intersects with many of Haddock’s other research interests. For one thing, the work the DEEPC team is doing will contribute to a worldwide ctenophore survey Haddock has been working on, which will eventually describe all of the known species of ctenophores and their relationships to one another.
This research might also contribute to an ongoing debate about the position of ctenophores in the tree of life. Among biologists there is active disagreement as to whether sponges or ctenophores were the earliest group to branch off from other members of the animal kingdom. Although Haddock doesn’t intend to publish a paper to directly address this controversy, it’s likely that some of his team’s work will shed further light on the history of animal evolution.
Another reason Haddock studies ctenophores is to learn more about their bioluminescence, or the way they produce and emit light. Although over 90 percent of ctenophores in Monterey Bay make their own light, the mechanisms and evolutionary benefits of this bioluminescence are not well understood. Haddock has long been fascinated by the glowing inhabitants of the oceans, and is considered a world expert in the field.
This ctenophore in the genus Beroe is a voracious predator, often attacking and swallowing other jellies whole. Image: George Matsumoto © 1995 MBARI
As the DEEPC project progresses, the team hopes to answer long-standing questions about evolution in the oceans and the ability of ctenophores to live under a wide variety of conditions. From Haddock’s perspective, the project will also shed some much-needed light on a group of animals long relegated to obscurity.
“Most people don’t have a really good intuitive sense of ctenophores,” Haddock commented. “Even in textbooks, people draw them upside down, because their conception of them is that they must be like a jellyfish; they flip them over and put their mouths facing down because they assume they must be swimming along like that.”
With all the work being conducted by the DEEPC team, we’ll soon know much more about these delicate, drifting, glowing predators. And we’ll know much more about their remarkable adaptation to their wide range of habitats, and perhaps the evolutionary processes that helped them survive.



More about jellyfish-and-comb-jellies
Jellyfish and comb jellies are gelatinous animals that drift through the ocean's water column around the world. They are both beautiful—the jellyfish with their pulsating bells and long, trailing tentacles, and the comb jellies with their paddling combs generating rainbow-like colors. Yet though they look similar in some ways, jellyfish and comb jellies are not very close relatives (being in different phyla—Cnidaria and Ctenophora, respectively) and have very different life histories.
Both groups are ancient animals, having roamed the seas for at least 500 million years. And, in the modern age, they are having similar effects on ecosystems. As seawater temperature rises, predators of jellies are removed by fishing, more structures are built in seawater, and more nutrients flow into the ocean, some types of jellyfish and comb jellies may be finding it easier to grow and survive. Whatever the reason, huge explosions in jelly numbers (a jelly bloom) can disrupt fisheries, make for unpleasant swimming, or foul up the works of power plants that use seawater for cooling. Invasive jellies have also wreaked havoc in some parts of the world.
Anatomy
A Simple Body Plan
Many jellyfish in the class Hydrozoa, such as this hydromedusa Aglantha digitale, are transparent and easily overlooked. (K. Raskoff, Monterey Peninsula College, Hidden Ocean 2005, NOAA)
While jellyfish and comb jellies have several anatomical differences, the basics are the same. Both have two major cell layers: the external epidermis and the internal gastrodermis. (Ctenophores also have musculature in their in-between layer, the mesoderm, but it likely evolved separately from the mesoderm found in bilaterians like people.)
The gastrodermis lines the all-purpose gut and an opening where food enters and reproductive cells are released and taken in. Jellies have no need for a stomach, intestine, or lungs: nutrients and oxygen slip in and out of their cell walls through the gastrodermis or even their bodies' outer cells. The outer cells that make up the epidermis contain a loose network of nerves called the "nerve net." This is the most basic nervous system known in a multicellular animal. (See Brains of Jelly? for more.)
Between these layers is a gelatinous material called mesoglea, which makes up most of their bodies. (Although some small species have very thin mesoglea.) Jellyfish and comb jellies are 95 percent water and so, rightly, mesoglea is mostly water! It also contains some structural proteins, muscle cells, and nerve cells, forming a kind of internal skeleton.
Comb Jellies' Unique Features
Dryodora glandiformis is a ctenophore found in Arctic and Northern European waters, bearing a pair of long and lovely tentacles. (© Alexander Semenov)
Comb jellies are named for their unique feature: plates of giant fused cilia, known as combs, which run in eight rows up and down their bodies. The combs act like tiny oars, propelling the comb jelly through the water. Many microscopic organisms, such as bacteria, also use cilia to swim—but comb jellies are the largest known animals to do so. The comb-rows often produce a rainbow effect. This is not bioluminescence, but occurs when light is scattered in different directions by the moving cilia.
Until 2015 scientists believed that comb jellies removed their waste via their "mouth," or what was believed to be the one hole in their body plan. A new study showed that comb jellies in fact release indigestible particles through pores on the rear end of the animal. This discovery adds another piece to the evolutionary puzzle of when animals evolved to have anuses.
Many comb jellies have a single pair of tentacles (often each tentacle is branched, giving the illusion of many tentacles) that they use like fishing lines to catch prey. They are armed with sticky cells (colloblasts) and unlike jellyfish, the tentacles of comb jellies don’t sting. (See The Stings: Nematocysts and Colloblasts for more.)
Jellyfishes' Unique Features
Alien-looking creatures, like this deep red jellyfish, Crossota norvegica, float in the Arctic Sea. (K. Raskoff, Monterey Peninsula College, Hidden Ocean 2005, NOAA.)
Jellyfish transition between two different body forms throughout their lives. The familiar body plan that looks like an upside down bell with tentacles hanging down from the inside is called the medusa. The polyp, the other cnidarian body plan, is the opposite, with the mouth and tentacles above, like a sea anemone. (See more in Reproduction & Lifecycle.)
Jellyfish also have a stinging adaptation that is unique to them and their close relatives (including sea anemones and hydras): nematocysts, or stinging cells. (See The Stings: Nematocysts and Colloblasts for more.)
Size
Jellyfish come in all shapes and sizes. Sizes in this graphic represent the upper average of their diameter. Larger individuals exist, but are not typical. (Smithsonian Institution)
Jellyfish and comb jellies vary greatly in size depending on the species. Most jellies range from less than half an inch (1 cm) wide to about 16 inches (40 cm), though the smallest are just one millimeter wide! The largest jellies are the Lion’s Mane Jellyfish (Cyanea capillata), which can be almost 6 feet wide (1.8 m) with tentacles over 49 feet (15 m) long. Larger individuals have been seen, but they are not typical. Venus’s girdle (Cestum veneris), a belt shaped comb jelly, can be 40 inches (1 meter) long.
The Nervous System
Brains of Jelly?
This venomous box jelly (Chiropsalmus quadrumanus) was collected off the coast of South Carolina. The specimen now resides in the Smithsonian’s marine collection. Its venomous sting can be lethal, especially to small children. (Bastian Bentlage)
Jellies don't have brains as we typically think of them: rather, they have a network of neurons ("nerve net") that allows jellies to sense their environments, such as changes in water chemistry indicating food or the touch of another animal. The nerve net has some specialized structures such as statocysts, which are balance sensors that help jellies know whether they are facing up or down, and light-sensing organs called ocelli, which can sense the presence and absence of light.
Additionally, some jellyfish have sensory structures called rhopalia, which contain receptors to detect light, chemicals and movement. One group of jellyfish, the cubozoan jellyfish, have complex eyes with lenses, corneas and retinas in their rhopalia. Although they respond to visual stimuli, scientists don’t know how the jellyfish interpret the images created by their eyes since they don’t have a brain with which to process them. Their nerve ring, a ring-shaped concentration of nerves found in jellyfish, seems to be involved, however.
A 2017 study of the upside-down jellyfish, Cassiopea, found that a brain is not required to experience sleep. At night Cassiopea enters a sleep-like state where it pulses less frequently than during the day and is slow to respond to disturbances. When kept awake throughout the night, the next day the jellyfish appear to be tired—their pulsing was noticeably slower than if they had a solid night of sleep. It is the first time an animal without a brain was observed sleeping. The discovery suggests sleep among all animals is an ancient characteristic with a shared evolutionary beginning, considering the neural network of jellyfish evolved before centralized nervous systems like a brain.
Diversity & Evolution
Diversity
Types of Jellyfish
This rare staurozoan, or stalked jellyfish, Haliclystus californiensis, is about 2 centimeters in length and was collected off the coast of California. (Allen Collins)
Jellies are found in oceans worldwide, in shallow and deep water, and a few can even be found living in freshwater. They have been found floating in the deepest parts of the ocean, like at the bottom of the Mariana trench.
All jellyfish are Cnidaria, an animal phylum that contains jellies, sea anemones, and corals, among others. There are more than 10,000 species of Cnidaria, and less than 4,000 of these are Medusazoa—those animals we think of as jellyfish. Those 4,000 jellyfish can be divided into four different groups.
SCYPHOZOA are the most familiar jellyfish, including most of the bigger and more colorful jellies that interact with humans, and are sometimes called "true jellyfish" for this reason. Scyphozoa spend most of their lives in the medusa body form, and there are at least 200 species.
HYDROZOA are jellyfish look-alikes but not in the same group as the “true jellyfish.” The swimming medusa stages of this group are often small and inconspicuous, whereas the bottom-dwelling polyps, or hydroids, usually take the form of large colonies. (See Reproduction & Lifecycle.) In the water column, the colonial siphonophores may be quite spectacular. These include the notorious Portuguese Man-o-Wars and many deep-sea forms, some of which stretch out up to 50 meters in length like giant fishing nets. Colonial siphonophores are composed of many specialized individuals called zooids that are genetically identical because they all come from a single fertilized egg. In 2016, researchers discovered what they believe to be a new hydrozoan species of Crossota, 12,140 feet (3,700 meters) deep within the Mariana Trench. Floating in the water column like a glowing spaceship, this Crossota jellyfish is an exception to most hydrozoans and will spend the majority of its life as a large medusa. There are around 3,700 species of Hydrozoa.
CUBOZOA are the box jellyfish, named for their box-like bells. Some cubozoans, such as the sea wasp (Chironex fleckeri), produce some of the most potent venom known. Cubozoan jellyfish also have a more developed nervous system than other jellyfish, including complex eyes with lenses, corneas and retinas. Some even engage in elaborate (for a jellyfish) courtship behavior! There are at least 36 species. In 2011, Allen Collins, a jellyfish expert at the Smithsonian, discovered a new species, which was named Tamoya ohboya in a public naming contest. (Listen to a podcast about box jellies.)
STAUROZOA are the stalked jellyfishes, which don't float through the water like other jellies, but rather live attached to rocks or seaweed. They are trumpet-shaped, and mostly live in cold water. There are around 50 staurozoan species, many notable for their unique combination of beauty and camouflage.
Types of Comb Jellies
Like this comb jelly (Aulococtena acuminata), many midwater animals are red. Red is an easier pigment to produce than black, and in dark water, can't be seen. (Marsh Youngbluth/MAR-ECO, Census of Marine Life)
Compared to jellyfish, there are far fewer species of ctenophores: only 100-150 species have been found, but quite a few are out there yet to be discovered and fully documented. The best-known comb jellies are those found close to shore because, there, they are most likely to run into people. Those can be roughly divided into three groups.
CYDIPPIDS all have rounded bodies—some spherical, some oval—with branched tentacles. (This means that their tentacles are fringed with smaller tentacles.) These tentacles can be withdrawn into the jelly's body into special sheaths or pouches on either side of their mouths.
LOBATES are defined by two flattened lobes that extend from the typical rounded ctenophore body down below their mouths. They also have short tentacles and tend to grow larger than cydippids.
BEROIDS (also known as "nuda") are sack-shaped and have no tentacles at all—but they do have a very large mouth, which they can zip shut very tightly.
Open ocean ctenophores are much less known. They tend to be very fragile because they don't have to endure rough coastal waves; many of them are so fragile that they cannot be collected by submersibles and are known only by photographs. They come in a great diversity of forms. Some are shaped like belts (Cestida), while others don't float in the water column at all, but live on the seafloor! (These are known as benthic ctenophores.)
Comb jellies live throughout the world's ocean, although most species prefer warmer water.
Evolution
How Closely Related?
Comb jellies (such as this Bolinopsis species) are named for their combs: the rows of cilia lining their bodies that propel them through the ocean. (© Alexander Semenov )
Jellyfish and comb jellies are in different phyla, but scientists have long argued over whether they have an especially close relationship apart from the rest of the animal kingdom. To distinguish them, all Cnidaria and Ctenophora were once described as Coelenterata—but that term is no longer commonly used.
To this day, some researchers believe they are sister groups, while others think they are not closely related. Some argue that a new fossil from the Chengjiang fossil site in China and a peculiar fossil in the Burgess Shale are similar enough to jellyfish that they might be ancient comb jellies that had recently split from the jellyfish lineage. Either way, there are still plenty of other questions to argue about, such as how long ago the two groups diverged, and even whether ctenophores might be the most ancient group of animals, diverging even earlier than sponges in the animal tree of life. These arguments continue because, as some of the simplest animals alive today, understanding their place in the tree of life helps people understand how all other animals—including people—evolved.
Fossil Jellies
This jellyfish fossil is from the Cambrian period, more than 500 million years ago. (Paulyn Cartwright et al. 2007 (PLOS ONE) )
Whichever came first, comb jellies and jellyfish (and other Cnidarians) made an important step in evolutionary history: they are the earliest known animals to have organized tissues—their epidermis and gastrodermis—and a nervous system. They're also the first animals known to swim using muscles instead of drifting with the whims of the waves.
The oldest ancestors of modern day jellies lived at least 500 million years ago, and maybe as long as 700 million years ago. That makes jellyfish three-times as old as the first dinosaurs!
Because jellies have no bones or other hard parts, finding jellyfish fossils is rare. But in 2007, a group of scientists including  Allen Collins from the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, discovered some beautifully-preserved jellyfish fossils buried in Utah from 505 million years ago. From around the same period, scientists have also found well-preserved comb jelly fossils in the Burgess Shale.
Fossils described in 2019 from the Quingjiang site in southern China are some of the best preserved Cambrian fossils ever found, with the cilia and plates easily visible. Scientists are optimistic this discovery will help tease out the relationship between jellyfish and comb jellies.
 
In the Food Web
Predators And Prey
The "pink meanie" jellyfish feeds on moon jellies. (Mary Elizabeth Miller, Dauphin Island Sea Lab)
Jellyfish and ctenophores are carnivorous, and will eat just about anything they run into! Most jellies primarily eat plankton, tiny organisms that drift along in the water, although larger ones may also eat crustaceans, fish and even other jellyfish and comb jellies. Some jellyfish sit upside down on the bottom and have symbiotic algae (zooxanthellae) in their tissues, which photosynthesize, and so get much of their energy the way plants do.
While their nematocysts and colloblasts do help them defend themselves, plenty of animals manage to catch and eat jellies: more than 150 animal species are known to eat jellies, including fish, sea turtles, crustaceans, and even other jellyfish. Jellies are the favorite food of the ocean sunfish (Mola mola) and endangered leatherback turtle (Dermochelys coriacea), which will migrate thousands of miles for the gelatinous delicacy. Young jellyfish are small enough to be part of the general zooplankton population and are eaten by many animals.
Humans also eat jellyfish: people have fished for jellies for at least 1700 years off the coast of China. Some 425,000 tons (more than 900 million pounds) of jellyfish are caught each year by fisheries in 15 countries, and most are consumed in Southeast Asia. Eating jellyfish may become more common around the world as we overfish more preferable fish species.
Feeding Adaptations
The Stings: Nematocysts and Colloblasts
Stinging cells (nematocysts) line the tentacles of this moon jelly (Aurelia aurita). (© Alexander Semenov)
Jellyfish and ctenophores both have tentacles with specialized cells to capture prey: nematocysts and colloblasts, respectively. Jellyfishes' nematocysts are organelles within special cells (cnidocytes) that contain venom-bearing harpoons. The cell is activated upon touch or chemical cue, causing the harpoon to shoot out of the cell and spear the prey or enemy, releasing toxin—a process that takes only 700 nanoseconds. A small number of jellyfish are very toxic to humans, such as the box jellyfish (Chironex fleckeri) and Irukandji jellyfish (Carukia barnesi), which can cause severe reactions and even death in some people.
Many comb jellies have colloblasts lining their tentacles, which work like nematocysts but release glue instead of venom. Upon touch, a spiral filament automatically bursts out of colloblast cells that releases the sticky glue. Once an item is stuck, the comb jelly reels in its tentacle and brings the food into its mouth. One species of ctenophore (Haeckelia rubra) recycles nematocysts from hydrozoan jellyfish it consumes and uses these to stun and kill prey.
Many Ctenophores, Many Ways to Feed
A beroid ctenophore lunges toward prey with its mouth wide open. (NOAA/OAR/National Undersea Research Program (NURP))
Comb jellies come in many shapes and sizes, and so within the group there are many ways to feed. The rounded and tentacled cydippids have branched tentacles lined with colloblasts that they use, in the traditional jelly style, like a fishing line to trap food and bring it to their mouths.
The lobate ctenophores have two flattened lobes that reach below their mouths. Special cilia waving between the lobes generate a current to pull planktonic food between the lobes and into the jelly's mouth, allowing them to feed on plankton continuously. They also use colloblast-lined tentacles to catch food.
The tentacle-less beroids depend on their large mouths. Instead of catching food with colloblasts, they swallow their prey (often other ctenophores!) whole and then clamp their mouths shut, giving them no escape route. Inside their mouths they have small cilia that act as teeth, pulling food apart, which also direct the food into the comb jelly's gut.
Defense Adaptations
Color and Bioluminescence
A transparent body helps this tiny comb jelly (Bathocyroe fosteri) blend into the water. (Marsh Youngbluth/MAR-ECO, Census of Marine Life)
Many jellyfish and comb jellies are able to produce light—an ability known as bioluminescence. They have proteins in some tissues that undergo a chemical reaction to produce blue or green light in response to stimuli such as touch. No one's quite sure why jellies bioluminesce, but it seems to be mainly a defense tactic. A bright enough flash could be enough to startle a predator—or to attract an even bigger predator to make the jelly's predator into prey.
Jellies have also adapted their body color to camouflage in the darkness. Most are nearly colorless and transparent, so they can be difficult for predators to see. However, some deep sea jellyfish and comb jellies are a bright red or orange color. Why would they be red instead of black to blend in with the dark water? Red cannot be seen in dark water (deeper than 200 meters), so there's no greater protection from black than red. But red is preferred to black because pigment is easier for animals to produce. Some deep sea jellies just have dark red guts, possibly serving to mask luminescent prey from other larger predators with eyes.
Reproduction & Lifecycle
Jellyfish: Medusa And Polyp Switch-Off
Throughout their lifecycle, jellyfish take on two different body forms: medusa and polyps. Polyps can reproduce asexually by budding, while medusae spawn eggs and sperm to reproduce sexually. (Smithsonian Ocean Portal)
Jellyfish have a complex life cycle: a single jellyfish reproduces both sexually and asexually during its lifetime, and takes on two different body forms.
An adult jellyfish is called a medusa, which is the familiar umbrella-shaped form that we see in the water. Medusa jellyfish reproduce sexually by spawning—the mass release of eggs and sperm into the open ocean—with entire populations sometimes spawning all together. Male and female jellyfish (there aren't many hermaphrodites) release the sperm and eggs from their mouths. In most species, fertilization takes place in the water; in others, the sperm swim up into the female's mouth and fertilize the eggs within.
The fertilized eggs then develop into planulae (singular: planula), which are ciliated free-swimming larvae shaped a bit like a miniature flattened pear. After several days of development, the planulae attach to a firm surface and transform into flower-like polyps. The polyps have a mouth and tentacles that are used to feed on zooplankton.
Polyps reproduce asexually by budding—when a polyp divides roughly in half to produce a new genetically identical polyp—or they can produce or transform into medusae, depending on the type of jellyfish. Hydrozoan polyps bud medusae from their sides; cubozoan polyps each transform into a medusa.

In schyphozoans, a process called strobilation takes place (shown in video and in diagram). During strobilation, a polyp splits into 10-15 plate-like segments stacked atop one another in a tower called a strobila. After a segment separates from the strobila, it is called an ephyra, a juvenile jellyfish. Ephyrae mature into the medusa form.
Most jellyfish are short lived. Medusa or adult jellyfish typically live for a few months, depending on the species, although some species can live for 2-3 years in captivity. Polyps can live and reproduce asexually for several years, or even decades.
One jellyfish species is almost immortal. Turritopsis nutricula, a small hydrozoan, can revert back to the polyp stage after reaching adult medusa stage through a process called transdifferentiation. This is the only animal known to do so.
Comb Jellies
The Arctic comb jelly or sea nut (Mertensia ovum) has two tentacles fringed with smaller tentacles, which are dappled with glue-like cells called colloblasts. (© Alexander Semenov)
In comparison to the jellyfish, comb jellies have a very simple lifecycle. Most species are hermaphroditic and able to release both eggs and sperm into the water, which drift with the waves until they find other gametes. Because most species have both male and female gametes, it's thought that they can self-fertilize as well.
This method may not seem very efficient, since it's likely that most of the gametes never find a match. But ctenophores make up for this by releasing them every day. If they run out of food while producing so many eggs and sperm, they can shrink and hunker down until they run into more food and can start reproducing again.
Once eggs and sperm find each other, the embryo develops into a larva that looks just like a small adult ctenophore—and, from there, all it has to do is grow up.
One species (Mertensia ovum) can reproduce even when it is still larva, and scientists think other species are also able to reproduce at a young age. This means that comb jelly populations can grow very fast under certain conditions.
Human Connections
Jellyfish Blooms
A cameraman navigates a smack of sea nettles (Chrysaora fuscescens) in Monterey Bay. Sea nettle blooms have become more common in recent years. (© 2010 Walt Disney Pictures)
Around the world, vast aggregations of jellyfish and comb jellies seem to be more common. These aggregations are known as "jellyfish blooms" or "jellyfish outbreaks," which can cause a wide array of problems. Too many jellies in the water can be a danger to swimmers, forcing towns to close their beaches. Jellies have clogged up machinery at coastal power plants, causing power outages. They can interfere with fisheries by eating fish larvae, and fisherman catch jellies instead of the fish they want. Where they occur, blooms of jellyfish even change seawater chemistry. Scientists hope to address this problem through the discovery of a practical application for jellyfish, like substituting jellyfish for the fish used in aquaculture feed. Jellyfish mucus, which has been shown to bind to microplastics, may even one day be used in water treatment facilities to help combat the world’s growing plastic problem.
Why are jellies becoming more common around the world? It seems likely that their spread is human-caused, although some scientists have argued that the blooms are part of a natural cycle. If the blooms are human-caused, there are several probable culprits.
OVERFISHING Over the past two decades, between 100 and 120 million tons of marine life have been removed from the ocean by fisheries each year on average. A lot of these marine species, including fish and invertebrates such as squid, eat some of the same food that jellies do: mainly, zooplankton. As these other predators of plankton are fished from the sea, jellies have less competition for food, and are able to grow and reproduce with fewer limits.
NUTRIENTS When fertilizers runoff from the rivers to the seas, they can create dead zones: areas of ocean where little life survives. The nitrogen and phosphorus in fertilizer helps phytoplankton grow very quickly, and there can be so many of these single-celled plant-like animals that they deplete oxygen from the water. Most animals can't survive in these conditions, but many jellies can better tolerate low-oxygen environments.
CLIMATE CHANGE The ocean is warming, and this might give some jellies a boost. The warmer water could help jelly embryos and larvae develop more quickly, allowing their populations to grow more quickly. And jellies that prefer warmer water will have more area to live in. However, this could also hurt some species as cold-water jelly species see their habitat shrink.
SUBMARINE SPRAWL Many industries, such as shipping, drilling and aquaculture, build docks, oil platforms and other structures in the water—sometimes referred to as “ocean sprawl"—which can serve as nurseries for jellyfish. To undergo their polyp stage, jellyfish need solid surfaces to settle upon. It’s much easier for jellyfish polyps to attach to man-made structures made of wood, brick and concrete than sand. Ocean sprawl provides more and better habitat for jellyfish to reproduce and complete their lifecycles.
Invasive Species & Fisheries
This ctenophore is native to the east coast of North and South America. In 1982, it was discovered in the Black Sea, where it was transported in ballast water. It subsequently spread to the Caspian Sea. (Marco Faasse, World Register of Marine Species)
Jellies are very good at surviving: they have broad diets, reproduce quickly, can shrink down if food runs out and then revive, and tolerate low-oxygen water. So, as you can imagine, they are also very good at thriving in new ecosystems once they arrive.
In the 1980s, the sea walnut (Mnemiopsis leidyi), a type of comb jelly, was brought to the Black Sea in ship ballast water. It reproduced and spread quickly, gobbling up zooplankton and leaving little behind for the larvae of commercial fish species, including anchovy, scad and sprat. Within a decade, the comb jellies took over the Black Sea and many of the fish populations collapsed, bringing local fisheries down with them. In a stroke of accidental luck, a different species of comb jelly (Beroe ovum)—a predator of the sea walnut—was brought over in a ship, and it's helping to bring down the population. A similar story of fishery collapse coinciding with jellyfish blooms is playing out off the coast of Japan.
However, the collapse of a fishery doesn't always end in jellyfish. A crash in the pollock and walleye fishery in the Bering Sea left an opening for jellyfish but, after reigning for a few years, the jellies gave up their crown as the fish returned. And when the Peruvian anchovy fishery collapsed in the 1970s, no jellyfish swarmed in to take their place.

Life Span
Jellyfish have complex life cycles, beginning with fertilized larvae floating in the ocean. The larvae sink and attach to the seabed or coral reefs, from there they develop into ‘polyps’. These polyps grow until they reach maturity, then detach from the seabed and float off into the ocean to feed and reproduce. These adult jellyfish are known as ‘medusas’. 
Because of their complex life cycles, it’s difficult for scientists to say unequivocally how long jellyfish live. Domestic jellyfish live anywhere from one to three years. Wild species can live anywhere from a few days to decades. 
One species in particular, dubbed the ‘Immortal Jellyfish’ (Turritopsis dohrnii) may actually live forever. This jellyfish is more likely to die at the hands (or mouth) of a turtle or fish than from old age.
Though there is no official ‘oldest jellyfish ever’, there is a very special species of jellyfish that scientists say may be immortal – biologically at least. 
Turritopsis dohrnii, dubbed ‘the immortal jellyfish’ may be the oldest living creature on the planet. When this jellyfish gets old, hurt, or even too hungry, it uses a process called ‘transdifferentiation’ to regenerate its old cells.
First, the jellyfish falls to the ocean floor or coral reef. From there the adult medusa reverts back to its polyp form, regenerating the cells and creating brand new, youthful cells that are genetically identical to the old medusa. The immortal jellyfish can theoretically do this forever, that is until it gets eaten by some other sea creature like a turtle, whale, or fish. Scientists think 
Jellyfish go through life in several different forms. Most jellyfish only go through these steps once before dying, but the immortal jellyfish repeats them over and over again — potentially forever.
Fertilized Egg: Jellyfish begin life as fertilized eggs. Adult female jellyfish release their eggs into the ocean, while adult male jellyfish release sperm. Ocean currents bring the two together to create a fertilized egg.
Planula: The fertilized egg floats along in the water and develops into a planula — an oval-shaped jellyfish egg with tiny cilia (hair-like appendages) that propel it through the water until it finds a hard surface to attach to.
Polyp: Once attached to a hard surface like the ocean floor or a coral reef, the egg develops into a polyp (think of a sea anemone). The polyp grows bigger and bigger until it resembles a stack of polyps ready to split off one by one.
Ephyra: Once the polyp is ready, it begins to split off, one stack at a time. Each piece that comes off is called an ephyra. The ephyra are now free-floating in the ocean and resemble flattened-out adult jellyfish. 
Adult Medusa: Once the ephyra are fully developed, they are known as medusa, and look like what we would all think of when we think of a jellyfish. From here the life cycle repeats.
Conservation
The jellyfish is one of the very few species that doesn’t seem to have been negatively impacted by climate change and human interference. As far as scientists can tell, jellyfish populations have actually increased in recent decades.
that unhindered, the immortal jellyfish can keep on living forever, with no cap on the number of times it can regenerate.
One type of endangered jellyfish is the freshwater jellyfish. Native to China, and no bigger than a penny, this jellyfish lives exclusively in fresh (not salt) water and has been on the decline in China due to water pollution. However, freshwater jellyfish can be found all over the world in sources of freshwater like lakes, reservoirs, and rivers.
Do jellyfish feel pain? It is believed that as they do not possess a true brain, they have no conscious behavior although they are capable of certain feelings as they are known to respond to their environments, specifically reacting to potential danger, which is when they exhibit a flight response. However, they are also known to get stressed, specifically when they are handled roughly. 

#